cloud integration: add dbt doc in integration section (#10822)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/integrate-tidbcloud-with-dbt.md

    3 of 3 OK loaded seed file analytics.raw_payments............................... [INSERT 113 in 0.24s]
    ```

    As you can see in the results, the seed file was started and loaded into three tables: `analytics.raw_customers`, `analytics.raw_orders`, and `analytics.raw_payments`.

2. Verify the results in TiDB Cloud. The `show databases` command lists the new analytics database that dbt created. The `show tables` command indicates that there are three tables in the analytics database, corresponding to the ones you have created.

    ```sql
    mysql> show databases;
    +--------------------+
    | Database           |
    +--------------------+
    | INFORMATION_SCHEMA |
    | METRICS_SCHEMA     |
    | PERFORMANCE_SCHEMA |
    | analytics          |
    | io_replicate       |
    | mysql              |
    | test               |
    +--------------------+
    7 rows in set (0.00 sec)

    mysql> use analytics;
    mysql> show tables;
    +---------------------+
    | Tables_in_analytics |
    +---------------------+
    | raw_customers       |
    | raw_orders          |
    | raw_payments        |
    +---------------------+
    3 rows in set (0.00 sec)

>     ```

Author: ```suggestion

    mysql> select * from raw_customers limit 10;
    +------+------------+-----------+
    | id   | first_name | last_name |
    +------+------------+-----------+
    |    1 | Michael    | P.        |
    |    2 | Shawn      | M.        |
    |    3 | Kathleen   | P.        |
    |    4 | Jimmy      | C.        |
    |    5 | Katherine  | R.        |
    |    6 | Sarah      | R.        |
    |    7 | Martin     | M.        |
    |    8 | Frank      | R.        |
    |    9 | Jennifer   | F.        |
    |   10 | Henry      | W.        |
    +------+------------+-----------+
    10 rows in set (0.10 sec)
    ```
```

---
title: Integrate TiDB Cloud with dbt
summary: Learn the use cases of dbt in TiDB Cloud.
---

# Integrate TiDB Cloud with dbt

[Data build tool (dbt)](https://www.getdbt.com/) is a popular open-source data transformation tool that helps analytics engineers transform data in their warehouses through SQL statements. Through the [dbt-tidb](https://github.com/pingcap/dbt-tidb) plug-in, analytics engineers working with TiDB Cloud can directly create forms and match data through SQL without having to think about the process of creating tables or views.

This document uses a project in the official dbt tutorial as an example to introduce how to use dbt with TiDB Cloud.

## Step 1: Install dbt and dbt-tidb

Installing dbt and dbt-tidb requires only one command because dbt is installed as a dependency when you install dbt-tidb.

```shell
pip install dbt-tidb
```

> 

Author: 试了下，dbt 更新版本了，现在使用 --version 确实会显示不兼容，但是可以使用。后面应该会做 dbt-core 1.3 兼容。

│    └── staging
│        ├── schema.yml
│        ├── stg_customers.sql
│        ├── stg_orders.sql
│        └── stg_payments.sql
└── seeds
    ├── raw_customers.csv
    ├── raw_orders.csv
    └── raw_payments.csv
```

In this directory:

- **dbt_project.yml** is the dbt project configuration file, which holds the project name and database configuration file information.

- The **models** directory contains the project’s SQL models and table schemas. Note that the data analyst in your company writes this section. For more information about models, see [SQL models](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/sql-models).

- The **seeds** directory stores the CSV files that are dumped from the database export tools. For example, TiDB Cloud can export the table data into CSV files through [Dumpling](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/dumpling-overview#dumpling-overview). In the jaffle_shop project, these CSV files are used as raw data to be processed.

## Step 3: Configure the project

To configure the project:

1. Complete the global configuration. In the user directory, edit the default global profile, `~/.dbt/profiles.yml` to configure the connection with TiDB Cloud:

    ```shell

>     vi ~/.dbt/profiles.yml

Author: 试一下 sudo。
`sudo vi ~/.dbt/profiles.yml`

    jaffle_shop_tidb:                                                         # project name
      target: dev                                                             # target
      outputs:
        dev:
          type: tidb                                                          # adapter type
          server: gateway01.ap-southeast-1.prod.aws.tidbcloud.com             # endpoint
          port: 4000
          schema: analytics                                                   # database name
          username: xxxxxxxxxxx.root

>           password: "your_password"

Reviewer: 这里应该提示 要根据 TiDB cloud 的 setup 来配置，或者链接到后面的“## Description of profile fields”

Author: 已添加`Description of profile fields`链接

    3 of 3 OK loaded seed file analytics.raw_payments............................... [INSERT 113 in 0.24s]
    ```

    As you can see in the results, the seed file was started and loaded into three tables: `analytics.raw_customers`, `analytics.raw_orders`, and `analytics.raw_payments`.

2. Verify the results in TiDB Cloud. The `show databases` command lists the new analytics database that dbt created. The `show tables` command indicates that there are three tables in the analytics database, corresponding to the ones you have created.

    ```sql
    mysql> show databases;
    +--------------------+
    | Database           |
    +--------------------+
    | INFORMATION_SCHEMA |
    | METRICS_SCHEMA     |
    | PERFORMANCE_SCHEMA |
    | analytics          |
    | io_replicate       |
    | mysql              |
    | test               |
    +--------------------+
    7 rows in set (0.00 sec)

    mysql> use analytics;
    mysql> show tables;
    +---------------------+
    | Tables_in_analytics |
    +---------------------+
    | raw_customers       |
    | raw_orders          |
    | raw_payments        |
    +---------------------+
    3 rows in set (0.00 sec)

>     ```

Reviewer: 这里可以加一句 `select * from raw_customers limit 10;` 吗？让用户看到跟后面转换后的表数据的对比

Author: done

│    └── staging
│        ├── schema.yml
│        ├── stg_customers.sql
│        ├── stg_orders.sql
│        └── stg_payments.sql
└── seeds
    ├── raw_customers.csv
    ├── raw_orders.csv
    └── raw_payments.csv
```

In this directory:

- `dbt_project.yml` is the dbt project configuration file, which holds the project name and database configuration file information.

- The `models` directory contains the project’s SQL models and table schemas. Note that the data analyst in your company writes this section. For more information about models, see [SQL models](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/sql-models).

- The `seeds` directory stores the CSV files that are dumped by the database export tools. For example,  you can export the TiDB Cloud data into CSV files through [Dumpling](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/dumpling-overview#dumpling-overview). In the `jaffle_shop` project, these CSV files are used as raw data to be processed.

## Step 3: Configure the project

To configure the project:

1. Complete the global configuration. In the user directory, edit the default global profile, `~/.dbt/profiles.yml` to configure the connection with TiDB Cloud:

    ```shell

>     vi ~/.dbt/profiles.yml

Author: ```suggestion
    sudo vi ~/.dbt/profiles.yml
```

    jaffle_shop_tidb:                                                         # project name
      target: dev                                                             # target
      outputs:
        dev:
          type: tidb                                                          # adapter type
          server: gateway01.ap-southeast-1.prod.aws.tidbcloud.com             # endpoint
          port: 4000
          schema: analytics                                                   # database name
          username: xxxxxxxxxxx.root

>           password: "your_password"

Reviewer 2: Done

    ```shell
    vi dbt_project.yml

    name: 'jaffle_shop'

    config-version: 2
    version: '0.1'

    profile: 'jaffle_shop_tidb'                   # note the modification here

    model-paths: ["models"]                       # model path
    seed-paths: ["seeds"]                         # seed path
    test-paths: ["tests"]
    analysis-paths: ["analysis"]
    macro-paths: ["macros"]

    target-path: "target"
    clean-targets:
        - "target"
        - "dbt_modules"
        - "logs"

    require-dbt-version: [">=1.0.0", "<2.0.0"]

    models:
      jaffle_shop:
          materialized: table            # *.sql which in models/ would be materialized to table
          staging:
            materialized: view           # *.sql which in models/staging/ would bt materialized to view
    ```

3. Verify the configuration. Run the following command to check whether the database and project configuration is correct.

    ```shell
    dbt debug
    ```

> ## Step 4: Load CSV files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 4: (optional) Load CSV files
```

> Now that you have successfully created and configured the project, it’s time to load the CSV data and materialize the CSV as a table in the target database. Note that this step is not generally required for a dbt project because the data for processing is already in the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:**
>
> This step is optional. If the data for processing is already in the target database, you can skip this step.

Now that you have successfully created and configured the project, it’s time to load the CSV data and materialize the CSV as a table in the target database. 
```

    ```shell
    dbt seed
    ```

    The following is an example output:

    ```shell
    Running with dbt=1.0.1
    Partial parse save file not found. Starting full parse.
    Found 5 models, 20 tests, 0 snapshots, 0 analyses, 172 macros, 0 operations, 3 seed files, 0 sources, 0 exposures, 0 metrics

    Concurrency: 1 threads (target='dev')

    1 of 3 START seed file analytics.raw_customers.................................. [RUN]
    1 of 3 OK loaded seed file analytics.raw_customers.............................. [INSERT 100 in 0.19s]
    2 of 3 START seed file analytics.raw_orders..................................... [RUN]
    2 of 3 OK loaded seed file analytics.raw_orders................................. [INSERT 99 in 0.14s]
    3 of 3 START seed file analytics.raw_payments................................... [RUN]
    3 of 3 OK loaded seed file analytics.raw_payments............................... [INSERT 113 in 0.24s]
    ```

    As you can see in the results, the seed file was started and loaded into three tables: `analytics.raw_customers`, `analytics.raw_orders`, and `analytics.raw_payments`.

> 2. Verify the results in TiDB Cloud. The `show databases` command lists the new analytics database that dbt created. The `show tables` command indicates that there are three tables in the analytics database, corresponding to the ones you have created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Verify the results in TiDB Cloud. The `show databases` command lists the new `analytics` database that dbt created. The `show tables` command indicates that there are three tables in the `analytics` database, corresponding to the ones you have created.
```

    | Database           |
    +--------------------+
    | INFORMATION_SCHEMA |
    | METRICS_SCHEMA     |
    | PERFORMANCE_SCHEMA |
    | analytics          |
    | io_replicate       |
    | mysql              |
    | test               |
    +--------------------+
    7 rows in set (0.00 sec)

    mysql> use analytics;
    mysql> show tables;
    +---------------------+
    | Tables_in_analytics |
    +---------------------+
    | raw_customers       |
    | raw_orders          |
    | raw_payments        |
    +---------------------+
    3 rows in set (0.00 sec)

    mysql> select * from raw_customers limit 10;
    +------+------------+-----------+
    | id   | first_name | last_name |
    +------+------------+-----------+
    |    1 | Michael    | P.        |
    |    2 | Shawn      | M.        |
    |    3 | Kathleen   | P.        |
    |    4 | Jimmy      | C.        |
    |    5 | Katherine  | R.        |
    |    6 | Sarah      | R.        |
    |    7 | Martin     | M.        |
    |    8 | Frank      | R.        |
    |    9 | Jennifer   | F.        |
    |   10 | Henry      | W.        |
    +------+------------+-----------+
    10 rows in set (0.10 sec)
    ```

> ## Step 5: Run the project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 5: Transform data
```

    2 of 5 START view model analytics.stg_orders.................................... [RUN]
    2 of 5 OK created view model analytics.stg_orders............................... [SUCCESS 0 in 0.23s]
    3 of 5 START view model analytics.stg_payments.................................. [RUN]
    3 of 5 OK created view model analytics.stg_payments............................. [SUCCESS 0 in 0.29s]
    4 of 5 START table model analytics.customers.................................... [RUN]
    4 of 5 OK created table model analytics.customers............................... [SUCCESS 0 in 0.76s]
    5 of 5 START table model analytics.orders....................................... [RUN]
    5 of 5 OK created table model analytics.orders.................................. [SUCCESS 0 in 0.63s]

    Finished running 3 view models, 2 table models in 2.27s.

    Completed successfully

    Done. PASS=5 WARN=0 ERROR=0 SKIP=0 TOTAL=5
    ```

    The result shows that two tables (`analytics.customers` and `analytics.orders`), and three views (`analytics.stg_customers`, `analytics.stg_orders`, and `analytics.stg_payments`) are created successfully.

> 2. Go to TiDB Cloud to verify that the creation is successful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Go to TiDB Cloud to verify that the transformation is successful.
```

| type             | The specific adapter to use                                             | Required  | `tidb`                                            |
| server           | The TiDB Cloud clusters' endpoint to connect to                         | Required  | `gateway01.ap-southeast-1.prod.aws.tidbcloud.com` |
| port             | The port to use                                                         | Required  | `4000`                                            |
| schema           | Specify the schema (database) to normalize data into                      | Required  | `analytics`                                       |
| username         | The username to use to connect to the TiDB Cloud clusters               | Required  | `xxxxxxxxxxx.root`                                |
| password         | The password to use for authenticating to the TiDB Cloud clusters       | Required  | `"your_password"`                                 |
| retries          | The retry times for connection to TiDB Cloud clusters (1 by default)    | Optional  | `2`                                               |

## Supported functions

> The cross-db macros are moved from dbt-utils into dbt-core, so you can use the following functions directly. For information about how to use them, see [dbt-util](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-utils).

Reviewer: 这里感觉没有 cross-db 的上下文，用户不需要知道什么是 dbt-utils。能否直接写：

```suggestion
You can use the following functions directly in dbt-tidb. For information about how to use them, see [dbt-util](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-utils).
```

Author: 好的，已修改。

| `username`         | The username to use to connect to the TiDB Cloud clusters               | Required  | `xxxxxxxxxxx.root`                                |
| `password`         | The password to use for authenticating to the TiDB Cloud clusters       | Required  | `"your_password"`                                 |
| `retries`          | The retry times for connection to TiDB Cloud clusters (1 by default)    | Optional  | `2`                                               |

## Supported functions

You can use the following functions directly in dbt-tidb. For information about how to use them, see [dbt-util](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-utils).

The following functions are supported:

- `bool_or`
- `cast_bool_to_text`
- `dateadd`
- `datediff`. Note that `datediff` is a little different from dbt-util. It rounds down rather than rounds up.
- `date_trunc`
- `hash`
- `safe_cast`
- `split_part`
- `last_day`
- `cast_bool_to_text`
- `concat`
- `escape_single_quotes`
- `except`
- `intersect`
- `length`
- `position`
- `replace`
- `right`

> - `listagg` (not supported yet)

Reviewer: listagg 到底是支持了还是没支持，L336 和 L356 矛盾的 😂

Author: 了解了。我把这条去掉，本来这里只是列出所有方法的。

> - `listagg` (not supported yet)

Author: ```suggestion
```
